# GettingAndCleaningDataCourseProject
Repository containing files created for Course Project of Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project

The file run_analysis.R contains a script that downloads and extracts source data from the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set. For more information on this dataset yu can refer to http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Based on this source data set, the script creates a tidy data set that:
- Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
- Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
- Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
- Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 

- The source data consists of a test and a train dataset. Each consist of the same data. So the desired tidy data is collected for these two types, and merged in one data file.
- The data to be collected for a set (test or train) is divided over multiple source data files. Within this set they are matched by rows, so the first row of each of the applicable data files refers to the same observation, etc.

Prerequisite: this script assumes the dplyr package is installed.

*****************************************************************************************
* run_analysis.R
*****************************************************************************************
The file run_analysis.R contains the script to create the tidy data set. This script depends on the dplyr package. The script assumes this package is installed. The script loads the library for the user.

run_analysis
The main function in this script file is run_analysis(). This is the function that should be used by the user to create the complete tidy data set. This function assumes the source data is downloaded and extracted in the working directory. If this is not the case an error will occur. The usee can call the function download_and_extract_data() to download and extract the needed source data.
This function takes the following steps:
- It creates the tidy data from the source data for all individual rows.
- It creates a summary of the tidy data, grouping by SubjectID and Activity, and taking the mean for each of the statistics for these combinations.
- It writes the created tidy data set to a file "tidy_data_summary.txt" in the working directory
- It also returns this data as a data frame

Apart from this main function, some helper functions are included. The most important helper functions are described below.

create_tidy_data()
This script takes the following steps:
- Create the tidy data for both the test and train data sets
- Merge the two sets together. Each has the same columns, the rows of the two sets are added.

create_tidy_data_type(type)
The function create_tidy_data_type(type) creates the tidy data for one of the data sets. The type paramater can be either "test" or "train".
This script takes the following steps:
- It reads the Subject IDs
- It reads the Activities. In the data sets, the activities are integer IDS, this script replaces these with the corresponding descriptive factor.
- From the actual measured statistics, only the mean and standard deviation variables are selected. The column names are taken from the features.txt codebook in the original data set. The names are adjusted to be more descriptive and easier to read.
- All columns from the above three data are combined in the dataframe that is returned.

tidy_data_summary(df)
The function tidy_data_summary(df) creates a summary based on the tidy data created in create_tidy_data(). The df parameter should be the dataframe generated by create_tidy_data(). This function groups the data by SubjectID and Activity, and for each combination of these calculates the mean for all statistics in the tidy data set.

*****************************************************************************************
* Codebook.md
*****************************************************************************************
The file Codebook.md describes the data file and all of the variables that are included in it.